Let's start with a quick high‑level architecture of Spring Security.
When you add Spring Security to a web app,
you're effectively adding a single filter,
the delegating filter proxy.
So basically,
Spring Security is now vetting all requests before they hit any servlets.
This filter then passes the request to a collection of
filters known as filtered chains,
each filter chain handling different request paths,
/admin might go to the filter chain 1, and /product might go to filter chain 2,
each filter chain specializing insecurity for that request.
Now, let's see this in action.
If we put a breakpoint in the FilterChainProxy and access the application,
you can see that we have three filter chains configured via Spring Boot.
The first two are for CSS and WebJars, and as you can see, they have no filters.
This is because in our configuration,
we configured Spring Security to ignore CSS and WebJar paths,
hence why there are no filters in these chains,
so requests to these endpoints will just go straight
through without security checks.
The reason for that is that by default, Spring Security simply blocks everything,
but we also need CSS styling in our registration and login pages.
The third filter is for all other requests.
You can see, it has 14 security filters,
each filter performing some sort of security task or checks like headers,
cross‑site forgery request protection, authentication,
authorization, session management, you name it.
And this was all configured by the builder in the web security
configuration adapter as we requested formLogin so Spring Security
added the UsernameAndPasswordAuthenticationFilter.
We added logout, hence the logout filter.
And with oauth2login,
Spring Security added the OAuth 2 authorization request redirect filter,
and the oauth2Login authentication filter,
and so forth.
Every filter here has a builder method that you can manipulate,
so you can clearly see here how configurable Spring Security is.
If you recall back to the login HTML page,
the Facebook link submitted a request to this URI,
/oauth2/authorization.
Let's open the OAuth2AuthorizationRequestRedirectFilter.
And as you can see, that's the path this filter looks out for.
And the final path variable tells this filter which provider the
user wants to sign in with then redirects the user to the
appropriate provider's authorization server,
requesting that Crypto Portfolio would like access to
this user's protected resources.
Now, after the provider, so in this case,
Facebook or Google, then authenticates the user and gets the user's consent,
the provider will then return an authorization code via
a redirect back to the application,
which will get picked up by the OAuth2LoginAuthenticationFilter,
which handles the exchange of this authorization
code for the actual access token, again,
all this is customizable.
We can manipulate the redirection filter via the redirection endpoint,
and we can even change the location of these paths.
Now, if we look at the OAuth 2 login builder method,
there are basically four key endpoints here,
which represent the stages of the OAuth 2 flow.
For the first one, the user selects Sign in with a provider.
Now, that generates a request to the redirection endpoint,
which redirects the user to the OAuth 2 provider's authorization server.
Once the provider authenticates the user and get their consent,
it redirects the user's browser back to the authorization
endpoint and includes the authorization code.
The authorization endpoint calls the token endpoint with the client ID,
secret, and authorization code to exchange for the access token.
With the access token,
Spring can then call the /userinfo endpoint to get the user's data.
So everything here is configurable, all the stages.
And once our app starts up,
Spring will read this builder and create and configure
the appropriate filters and endpoints.
Another component you might want to change is the
clientRegistrationRepository as currently,
client details are stored in our configuration file,
but we might want to store them in a database,
hence you can create your own repository implementation.
Okay, that's enough theory for now, Wojciech.
Next,
Let's solve the problem of registering a new OAuth 2 user when they access the application for the first time.